# Report1 for DNA Storage

## # Introduction

### 1 Prospect
In the age of information explosion, the speed of information generation grows rapidly. According to the prediction of IDC(Internet Data Center), there will be 460 billion GB data created per day. The increase of information is challenging the existing storage device. Thus, we need to create a new storage device with higher capacity of data. DNA has high storage density, only 1 kilogram can store the data around the world. Besides, DNA’s structure is stable in ordinary temperature, which means it can store data in long term with any other power like electricity. This characteristics of DNA make it a useful material of data storage.

### 2 Constraints
However, DNA storage has some constraints. First of all, the DNA synthesis is slow and expensive, it will take thousands of dollars and days of time to just store several MB data. Then, the stable structure of DNA based on its constraints on GC content and run-length, which means the DNA must have G and C bases between 40% and 60% and the number of continuous identical base can not be larger than 3. More over, there are some extra errors when encoding data into DNA, such as insertion and deletion. Therefore, there is a need of specific error correcting code for DNA storage. At last, since we can only synthesize DNA in short segment, it is hard to random access the data after encoding it into DNA. This constraints of DNA storage still need to be solved.

### 3 Existing Works
Until now, there are some achievements all over the world in DNA storage. In 2015, S.M.H.T Yazdi et al. have created the first DNA-based storage architecture that enables random access to data blocks and rewriting of information stored at arbitrary locations within the blocks. In 2017, Y.Erlich and D.Zielinski use LT code to realize fountain, which enables a efficient DNA storage architecture. In 2018, W.song et al. came up a method to encoding data into DNA while satisfying the constraints of GC content and run-length. In 2019, Microsoft and University of Washington have created a fully automated system of DNA storage.

### 4 Thesis

---

## # GC-Content and Run-Length Constraint

### 1 Method Overview
Not to make things too complex at the very beginning, it is reasonable to first consider only GC-content and run-length constraints since these two are mentioned and considered by most other studies.

Wentu Song et al. have come up with a method that can (only) satisfy these two constraints and can theoretically reach the highest code rate of $\frac{2n-1}{2n}$ [Ref]. The main idea of this method is staright forward. It simply tries to enumerate  elements in $Z_{4}^{n}$ that satisfies run-length constraint with as less as possiable GC-content distance. GC-content distance is defined as the absolute value of the difference between GC-content and 0.5. By enumerating in this way, it is expected that at least $2^{2n-1}$ elements can be found such that all the elements in $Z_{2}^{2n-1}$ can be mapped to a subset of $Z_{4}^{n}$, which actually generates an encoding table.

It is shown in [Ref] that if $3 \le n \le 35$, at least $2^{2n-1}$ elements that satisfy run-length constraint (with preceding three nucleotides) can be found in $Z_{4}^{n}$. And according to the demonstration in [Ref], there is no element violating GC-content constraint for $n=8$ and $n=10$.

### 2 Encoding Details
Since $n$ should satisfy $3 \le n \le 35$. Hence, the encoding scheme must encode the original data into many short segments which are no longer than 35. Recap that DNA synthesis procedure can generate oligos of 200 nt long. So the run-length validity of an encoded segment should be verified together with preceding three nucleotides and each of the 64 possibilities of preceding three nucleotides will independently have an encoding function.

To generate the encoding table, i.e., the encoding function, the first step is to find a set, say $S$, of all elements that satisfy run-length constraint in $Z_{4}^{n}$. The second step is to find a subset of $S$, say $G$, containing $2^{2n-1}$ elements with least GC-content distance. The decoding table can be generated by reversing the encoding table. 

To encode a message, we first use arbitrary one of the 64 encoding table to encode the first segment. Then for each segment to encode, we choose the encoding funtion according to the previous three encoded nucleotides and use it to encode this segment.

To decode a message, we use the same function for encoding the first segment to decode the first encoded segment. The remaining procedure is similar to that of encoding.

### 3 Implementation and Test
To find the $2^{2n-1}$ elements with least GC-content distance, a priority queue can be used to store all the elements that satisfy run-length constraint and then desired $2^{2n-1}$ elements can be directly extracted from the priority queue. 

To store the reversed table, i.e., the decoding function, a hashmap and binary search are both availiable. For binary search, the time comlexity is $O(\log_2(2^{2n-1})) = O(n)$ which is actually $O(1)$ since $3 \le n \le 35$.

Hence, the expected time comlexity for encoding and decoding $m$ segments are both $O(m)$. The most time consuming operation is constructing the encoding table since at least $2^{2n-1}$ elements need to be checked, which leads to a complexity of $O(2^n)$ for both time and space. However, the good news is that, the table need only to be constructed once.

TEST part still in progress......

---

## # LT Code

In progress...

---

## # Future Plan

### [1 LT Code]

### 2 Further Test

### 3 Improve Performance
